Create HIP for Adoption of CUE (#364)
helm/community: hips/hip-0019.md

---
hip: "0019"
title: "Adoption of CUE for Values Processing and Validation in Helm"
authors: ["Jiří Altman <jiri.altman@usu.com>", "Jan von Löwenstein <jan.von.loewenstein@sap.com>"]
created: "2024-08-07"
type: "feature"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

> This HIP proposes the integration of CUE (Configuration Unification Engine) as the primary tool for processing and validating Helm values files, replacing the existing JSON Schema support. As a superset of YAML, JSON, and JSON Schema, CUE extends existing capabilities while maintaining complete backward compatibility. This ensures that all current Helm charts and configurations remain fully supported, with the added benefits of enhanced validation, improved defaulting mechanisms, and easier schema management.

Reviewer: nit: I would use e.g. superseding rather than replacing, and implementation rather than support. To me, "replacing" and "support" reads like JSON schema support will go away in lieu of using CUE. But I think the HIP means to utilizing CUE to implement JSON schema functionality.

```suggestion
This HIP proposes the integration of CUE (Configuration Unification Engine) as the primary tool for processing and validating Helm values files, superseding the existing JSON Schema implementation. As a superset of YAML, JSON, and JSON Schema, CUE extends existing capabilities while maintaining complete backward compatibility. This ensures that all current Helm charts and configurations remain fully supported, with the added benefits of enhanced validation, improved defaulting mechanisms, and easier schema management.
```

> This HIP proposes the integration of CUE (Configuration Unification Engine) as the primary tool for processing and validating Helm values files, replacing the existing JSON Schema support. As a superset of YAML, JSON, and JSON Schema, CUE extends existing capabilities while maintaining complete backward compatibility. This ensures that all current Helm charts and configurations remain fully supported, with the added benefits of enhanced validation, improved defaulting mechanisms, and easier schema management.

Reviewer: Also, I always thought CUE stood for "Configure Unify Execute" (and not: "Configuration Unification Engine"). Where does this alternate come from?

> ## Motivation

Reviewer: One significant benefit to utilizing CUE for values processing, is that CUE would allow "pre-processing" of input values (beyond validation).

A frequent pain-point of Helm charts is that values tend to be very "raw". It is difficult for values to not simply be the exact inputs to substitute in templates. As any business logic that expands or modifies the values needs to be written in gotemplate, either as a "named template" (function) or inline with the template logic. And gotemplate is both a terrible language to write configuration "business" logic. And the actual rendering of charts IMHO should contain as little business logic as possible (should be relegated as much as possible to dumb value substitution).

One motivation to me would be to enable mutation of the input values (which CUE excels at). In order to "expand" the user provided values into values suitable for the  (gotemplate) rendering phase.

This HIP could just limit CUE to validation only. But it might be worth considering if CUE could be used beyond validation?

Reviewer: I think, you might be thinking about the above in this point? If so, I would recommend expanding that

> **Enhanced Features**: CUE natively supports advanced features such as defaulting, flexible referencing of values, and other configuration management capabilities critical for complex Helm deployments.

The current JSON Schema implementation for validating Helm values files has several notable limitations:

> 1. **Outdated Implementation**: The existing JSON Schema support in Helm is based on Draft-07 and has not been actively maintained. It supports only a subset of the specification and contains non-standard issues, leading to inconsistent behavior and limited validation capabilities.

Reviewer: minor note: https://github.com/helm/helm/pull/13283 would mean Helm can support newer json schema versions

(if that PR lands, we would want to remove this point I think)

- **Community Engagement**: Engage with the community through forums, GitHub discussions, and social media to answer questions, gather feedback, and provide support during the transition.

- **Sample Charts**: Provide sample Helm charts utilizing CUE for validation, serving as references for users.

## Reference Implementation

A proof-of-concept implementation has been developed and is available in [PR #13236](https://github.com/helm/helm/pull/13236). This implementation demonstrates the integration of CUE with Helm and includes basic examples of values file validation using CUE.

## Rejected Ideas

- **Enhancing JSON Schema Support**: Extending the existing JSON Schema implementation to support newer drafts and features was considered but rejected due to the complexity and maintenance burden, as well as the limitations of JSON Schema in handling non-JSON formats like YAML.

- **Developing a Custom Validation System**: Creating a custom validation system specifically for Helm was considered but deemed unnecessary given CUE's existing capabilities and ecosystem support.

> - **Using Alternative Tools**: Other configuration languages and validation tools were evaluated but did not offer the same level of compatibility, features, or community support as CUE.

Reviewer: On this note, we have considered Pkl (https://pkl-lang.org/). I'm more familiar with CUE than Pkl. But Pkl would I believe provide both validation and rendering functionality.

That said, there is certainly rationale to keep value processing/validation and manifest rendering separate concerns. Which does mean we could choose separate technologies for each. ie. for values processing/validation we could support (JSON schema, CUE, Pkl), and for manifest rendering we could support (Pkl, gotemplate)

Overall, Helm I think needs to make a fairly strategic choice in how to approach these problem spaces. Personally, I would like to see better support in both. JSON schema (to the point of this HIP) is limited. And using unstructured text formatting ala. gotemplate for producing structured documents (Kubernetes object manifests) is a awkward at best solution.
